[Music]
all right so we spoke about
super intelligence
the last time
and we we concluded that there can't be
such a thing as super intelligence
because there's an underlying
universality underlying the the human
mind and every other intelligence
artificial or not would have that in
common with us
um so and as you said earlier in that
interview there there can be no such
thing as something to us as we are to
Apes for example
so this brings us to the question of our
role in the cosmos in general so for
example you say
that
um you know for centuries we believe
that the we were at the center of the
universe
and that the sun revolved around us and
the Stars revolved around us and that
there were Gods who who take great
interest in what we down here on Earth
do excuse me what we do so everything
was about us so this is anthropocentrism
the idea that people are at the center
the most important thing
and most explanations of everyday
phenomena were anthropocentric but
nowadays many people in the west have
since decided not to to take
anthropocentric approaches
um and now our most fundamental
explanations don't involve humans at all
you know our best explanation in physics
are about things like
forces or space and time and whatnot so
one could conclude as many
scientifically minded people do nowadays
that people are not that important at
all
but you take issue with this
yes and the fact that there are only two
kinds of entities
in the world the ones that can create
knowledge and the ones that don't
create explanatory knowledge and the
ones that don't the connection between
those two things
is via the laws of physics via the
universality of the laws of physics
the universality that links us with all
possible agis uh extraterrestrial
intelligences and so on
the the the universality that connects
us with them is precisely the
universality of the laws of physics so
so it's it's uh an interesting fact that
that we got to the concept of universal
laws of physics by by more and more
distancing ourselves from
anthropocentrism
when we had completely finished this
process
and got round to the to the modern
concept of the universal laws of physics
universal laws of computation of
evolution and so on
we finally got round to realizing
that that puts us at the center of
things in a completely different way
or I would say two ways
one is that because of like the
testability that that scientific
theories have
that produces a link between
understanding the world and controlling
it
because controlling it is is always
putting to the test and understanding of
it
and the understanding has got to be
testable therefore we can control more
and more of the world the more of it we
understand
but there's also the other way around
that simply to understand humans
and I put this argument in the book
simply to understand humans one must
understand the laws of physics in their
entirety
because
in order to understand as I say in the
book when the team of scientists are
going to pop the champagne Cork and
regard that as a physical system you
want to predict when it will when or
whether
it will pop the champagne cork you must
understand whether
they are going to succeed in
understanding the thing they're trying
to understand which could be anything
it could be something about distant
galaxies it could be something about
quarks
and it could be something about uh
biology or about
morality or whatever when they succeed
they will pop the champagne cork if you
want to predict that you need to know
the truth of the matter that they are
investigating
so to understand humans just humans you
need to understand everything and
conversely as I said initially
humans on the other hand
can affect anything and eventually
control anything that's controllable
so humans play a central role in the
cosmos perhaps the the most significant
role that anything could play
yes uh I I think that it's a candidate
for the most significant I mean if
someone says oh no well if space-time is
the most significant well maybe but but
uh certainly humans are up there in that
they are completely indispensable for
understanding anything ultimately let's
get to the Multiverse you are a famous
proponent of the so-called many
universes interpretation interpretation
of quantum physics
how is this interpretation different
from like what are the contenders and
how is it different from from them
well as you've just indicated with your
with your air quotes
um I don't think there are any other
contenders
um there are various versions of uh
uh this many worlds or many Universal
interpretation really it's should be
called everettian quantum theory it's
not an interpretation it's just what the
quantum theory says when taken seriously
there there are several different
versions of it including rather far
removed ones but in order to explain
what brings about the experimental
results
that we see in just ordinary
Quantum Optics Laboratories one must
take on board the multiplicity of
reality
that is that when we do the experiment
there are many of us many instances of
us doing the experiment in parallel or
in almost parallel
um
You can predict the results
without assuming that
but that's just an empty prediction it
doesn't explain how they come about and
science should be about and therefore it
doesn't involve any understanding
it just involves uh predicting just as
uh uh I might tell somebody how to
switch my TV on and how to reach a
certain Channel
but that is completely different from
explaining to them how a TV works
or understanding how it works or from
building a better TV you cannot build a
better TV just being just by being told
what will happen when you press the
remote
and the same with physics in general
so we need the this this Multiplicity
of universes of of realities or whatever
you want to call them we don't have good
language for it yet
or our language is is built on the
assumption that only one thing happens
but in fact many things happen and we
understand it very well now we
understand it for example much better
than Everett himself did in the 1950s
and it is simply the only Contender for
an explanation of what happens
to bring about the experimental results
now you say in the chapter both about
the Multiverse that every fiction that
does not violate the laws of physics is
fact
why is that the case
that is the case because physical
objects
do not have sharp positions
that is when I say sharp I mean sharp
means in this terminology the same in
all universes
so the laws of physics the laws of
quantum physics require
that uh there is no such thing as a
completely sharp position of a particle
or of a person
and no such thing as a completely sharp
configuration of a person
or of their thoughts
and so there are always a few universes
doing Maverick things
when I say a few I really mean a tiny
number like 2 to the minus 2 to the
power of a hundred or something
of of the really Maverick ones but still
that's not zero so this doesn't affect
things like decisions it doesn't affect
what we should do when we're betting on
on
poker games or or horse races but it
does mean that if you're talking about
existence very strange things exist
somewhere in the Multiverse
uh now having stressed that point let me
just uh claw that back a little in
regard to the brain and in regard to
thinking
because thinking is an error correction
process
and there are errors arising constantly
in in the brain glitches electrical
glitches and also glitches due to uh
failed uh temporary failed understanding
where we which we later correct
either by purely Hardware methods where
you know the neurons the majority of
neurons are saying that the minority are
wrong and because we we recognize errors
and so
the number of the the proportion of
universes in which our brain does
something Maverick are exponentially
smaller again because error correction
is exponentially efficient and and by
the way that that is true whether we are
classical computers or quantum computers
so really for all practical purposes
um the the existence of Maverick
versions of ourselves are is is
negligible
but they are there and that's why I said
that they are there in other words
um
all stories that do not violate the laws
of physics
um happen somewhere
but uh the ones that do violate the laws
of physics uh don't happen because they
are uniform that they're Universal
they're uniform across the Multiverse so
I mean this is fascinating because it
does mean that every every book you've
read every movie you've seen if the plot
doesn't violate the laws of physics it
really has happened or does currently
happen somewhere in the Multiverse
except it's not a movie it's real
yes the error correction idea applies
there too
not just in the brain but in in a book
or movie
um if the book let's say is about
someone doing magic like Harry Potter or
something
then although it can't happen that real
magic occurs in in these Maverick
universes
uh by the way the term Maverick universe
is I think was invented by Bryce DeWitt
my my former boss in University of Texas
it just seems to have happened
because something isn't really
levitating it's just that the atoms in
the room happen to strike the the
Apparently levitating object in just the
right way is to keep it levitating
thing is those those universes
aren't really universes because
the very next thing that will happen in
the vast majority of those is that the
levitated object will fall to the ground
and that is because the apparent
explanation of what was holding it up
namely magic isn't true what was holding
it up was just accident if you think
that
a uh something deserves to be called a
universe
or Universe in which a particular story
happens if if you think that that only
deserves to be called that if the story
con is the explanations in the story are
true in that universe
then these Harry Potter type universes
aren't universes at all
they they are just uh wannabe universes
they're they're just bits of the
Multiverse we know anyway that that uh
there are many bits of the Multiverse
that aren't universes universes are
large-scale structures
in the Multiverse but there's plenty
happening there that that it can't be
thought of as universes so the the Harry
Potter ones are among those two this
opens up a possibility for some
interesting thought experiments for
example when you write in the book about
the problem of Aging for example and you
write that you hope that one day we will
solve this problem I hope so too and and
the problem of death more generally
curing death is not against the laws of
physics
somewhere in the universe it happens and
it's already happened some somewhere in
the Multiverse sorry yes summer in the
Multiverse and
it it also happens
where people very much like us do it
and
couldn't we conclude that we don't
really need to worry about death even
right now even though we haven't solved
death because you could imagine another
Universe where it's exactly the same you
with all the same memories all the same
contents of your mind
and that universe and our universe are
exactly the same up and like up until
the point where people cure death so you
do get to survive it's just in a
different universe that seems unlikely I
mean those of us who read say Scientific
American
will will have seen
um hints that this was going to happen
um and therefore will be different
there's also another problem which is
that it is not yet known how to
understand
the issue of personal identity across
the Multiverse
should somebody who accidentally turns
out to have my exact State of Mind
be regarded as just another instance of
me just like the the ones that have a
common origin with me
they are the same for a reason
the ones that are the same by accident
is that the same as the ball being held
up by Harry Potter magic in other words
not me just looks like me
or is it me because anybody who has my
state of mind
has my exact State of Mind really is me
we don't know yet one has to work
extremely hard
to make sense of probability and
decision making
in the Multiverse I know because I've
worked extremely hard to make sense of
it
and to make sense of personal identity
as well is a harder problem
in my view but it it will be done
and we're understanding more and more
about the Multiverse over time
now in a similar vein the origin of life
is still a mystery there are some good
explanations you cite one the RNA World
hypothesis in your book but it's still a
mystery as to why is it that life arose
when it did and you know what were the
conditions that that led to that but in
the same vein you could ask well the
formation of life is not against the
laws of physics clearly because we're
alive
and if it's not against the laws of
physics well then it has to happen
somewhere in the Multiverse and it is
only in universes where the formation of
intelligent life in particular happens
that somebody even wonders
why it's there yes but as I also write
in a book
um
that by itself which is which is what
they call an anthropic argument
um in my view isn't enough to explain
anything I I think it can form part of
an explanation of things but it can
never be the whole explanation because
if it were the whole explanation of for
example why life formed
then
one can show by a simple argument due to
my other old boss Dennis Sharma that it
only just happened
the the
laws the initial conditions uh whatever
the state of the planet and so on
in the vast majority of cases where
that was the only explanation for why
life formed
it only just formed
and if it only just formed it's a bit
hard to see why it won't be snuffed out
in the next moment
so I mean that's not a watertight
argument but but it it it it it kind of
takes the wind out of the sails of the
anthropic argument
one really needs something else another
reason why we should be looking for
something else is that an anthropic
argument is kind of giving up
it's kind of saying uh you know where
it's not due to a law of physics it's
not due to some new principle that along
the same lines as the principle of
evolution which explained
so wonderfully uh what were previously
mysteries about about life
it's just that if it weren't so we
wouldn't be asking well I think that
should be regarded as not good enough
right
okay let's wrap it up here again this
was a follow-up interview to the first
interview we did in German for the
translation of David Deutsch's book the
beginning of infinity
it is now available in German titled
and it's about so much more than what we
just discussed we really only scratched
the surface here it's also about good
versus bad philosophy how to make
decisions rationally
why flowers are beautiful how cultures
evolved how our species evolved the
problem of sustainability again
It's a Wonderful book
a fascinating read and I encourage our
German speaking
viewers and listeners to read the book
it's guaranteed to change your your
world view
it was fascinating speaking with you
nice talking to you and let's see how
the German Edition does